(
  Bitfields and hardware-linked memory

    struct TDemo
      TUInt_1 Data : 1
      TUInt_1 Status : 1
      TUint_1 : 6

    TDemo Demo = (TDemo *) 100

  Using bitfield record without "volatile" makes compiler think
  it can know it's contents from previous code. Making record
  write-only register. No feedback from hardware.

  Using bitfield record with "volatile" makes compiler update
  all byte when one bit is read or written.

  Additional quirk "is bit can be reset by writing one" schizophrenia
  from ATmega. Problem is that one bit is used as I/O by hardware.

  When it is set to 1 by hardware it means operation is complete
  and hardware idles. 0 means operation in progress.

  When it is set to 1 by software it means operation needs to be
  done and software idles. 0 means operation in progress,
  software idles.

  So after setting that bit to 1 next read software sees it as 0
  which means hardware is doing job.

  But that damned bit can also be write as 1 when updating bitfield.
  Hardware tracks byte writes, not bit writes.

  Setting it to 0 before doing changes has no effect. Next read will
  read it as 1. Hardware magic.


  So in this implementation we have functions to copy that "volatile"
  registers and set them to copy. We're working with copies.

  Cases when we're changing one bit or just reading bits are safe.
  We don't have to use wrappers for them.

) 2026-04-09

(
  Today I finished code

  Use case was reading data from Slave device.

  Implementing Slave mode just for completeness is not planned.

  Annoyance was when I discovered that hardware will not show you
  byte it got until you tell it how to respond for it (ACK or NACK).

  Kinda stupid annoying quirk. In protocol when you are master you're
  moving clocks. So you just did 8 clock ticks and got 8 data bits
  from Slave. You can think about value you've got before doing 9th
  tick with your response.

  I was designing top-bottom and wrote high-level code in that
  assumption. Was forced to redesign it to match realities.

) 2026-04-10
